The Joe Rogan experience.
I decided not to go to,
I could have gone to some of these places in Scottsdale or LA or Malibu. Um,
and I could have gotten massages and had the green smoothies and stuff like
that, which, which can help a lot of people.
But me after having like a 15 year off and on battle 10 years where I was,
I was pretty solid. Um, and I, you know,
come out of it and I'd get right back on the horse and I'd be good for,
you know, years. Um, I decided I needed fight camp.
I needed a training camp. I needed the right coaching, the right strategy.
And I needed people to, to, to ride me like, you know, be hard on me.
This is get sober. Yeah. This was get sober. So that's, that's what I wanted.
And so I saw out one of the toughest places in, in America to go to,
it's kind of a, like a 12 step completion program.
It's a big book bootcamp, but it's also like a, uh,
it's developed a little bit out of like militaristic style. And, um,
I don't know. It was really hard on you, you know, I mean, while we're there,
people were being called, you know, mask wear cloud, as you fake as. And,
uh, you Dr. Jel, Mr. Hyde. I mean,
just like they would just grill people and you're up at five. Is that good? Um,
I, I, I don't, I don't know exactly, but it was what I needed at that moment,
really. Um,
it was what I needed at that moment because I needed to not run from it.
I needed to face it and I needed to look at the, the stuff and the.
Are the people running are people that have gotten clean.
This way? Yes.
They have a 87% success rate really for the people that do 90 days. Now,
a lot of 'em only do 45. Some of 'em only do 60 days.
And then I would say probably more than half of the people that went there, uh,
ended up leaving because of how art it was.
But the only reason they wanted people there is if you really truly wanted to
get sober, right? Because for years you've been stuck in the cycle of addiction.
And for me, the easiest way, I mean,
they explained it and I had drawn it on whiteboards a lot. But for me,
whenever you would have that first use, you would have this,
what they call an allergy set off. You, you have an AB no normal reaction to a,
to a substance, just like someone else can't have peanuts.
I can't have drugs or alcohol because when I do an allergy goes off,
that says in my body, I have an abnormal reaction that says, you know,
I know rationally that one is too many,
but whenever have that first use a, thousand's not enough.
I gotta keep having it. And this.
Explained to you by these people at this rehab, or this.
Is just your own feeling. No, no. This was explained. And,
and there's this doctor that's really great. His name's Dr. Uh, Kevin,
and he's got like a, a Irish last name, but he's, he's got some stuff on,
I think Netflix and Amazon. And, um, he was a Navy, um, surgeon,
and basically like, he ended up right himself scripts for Oxy,
and then he was injecting himself with other stuff. And he got put in a,
a prison, a military prison, that one that got taken down in, uh, like Kansas.
I forget what it's called, but elevens worth or something like that.
He was put in that prison. Anyways.
Now he's spent his time there really trying to help people in addiction.
And that cycle of addiction basically is explained as after you have that first
use and that allergy set off. Now, you go on your spree because what he,
what that doctor did while he brought him up was he shows scientifically through
brain research that an addicts brains different.
Like they don't have dopamine receptors. And whenever that hits now,
all of a sudden it goes back to that almost hunter gatherer brain,
where it says, this is a priority for survival. Like,
that's why some addicts will prioritize it above food or water or family.
And you see 'em do irrational things. Mm. And then they go on this run.
And then when they, after, after that spree, after that run,
they come out of it and they emerge remorseful. They feel terrible.
I I've had moments like that. And then all of a sudden, you,
you make a firm resolution. That's what you back it up with. Is that what.
You felt when you did it the first 30 days when you did it for 30.
Days? Yeah. You came out. I emerged remorseful. And then I, I promised myself,
I promised my wife time. I promised my family, uh, friends that,
that this isn't who I want to be. And,
and what they say about an addict is you could hook them up to a lie detector
and they absolutely a hundred percent mean it that they never intend to use
again. But then what happens is they back with that firm resolution,
I promise this was the last time all of a sudden you get restless irrit of bull
and discontented. Well, whenever an addict gets wrestles here to bowl disco,
contented, I, I would ask the question. What's the,
what's the difference between discontent and discontented? You know, disco,
discontent, you might be a little restless, but discontented basically says,
well, if discontent is I'm thirsty,
discontented is there's not enough water in the whole world to quench this
thirst. Mm. And so you get in that place where you have this mental obsession.
So you have this mental obsession, you get restless, irritable,
and discontented, and then you go back to that first use,
and then you get stuck in that cycle of addiction again.
And that's where I lived for five years from 17 to 23 was,
I was just looping back and forth. So you get sober for.
A little bit, then go back again. And.
From 17 to 23, no, I went sober hardly at all. I would get sober for my fights,
the eight weeks of fight camp, 10 weeks of fight camp. But then that's why, um,
that's why grudge training center had to kick me out. You know, I mean,
Brendan was on that vote. I think Rashad Nate Mart, um, Shane, Shane Carwin,
uh, Dwayne bang, Ludwig,
all those guys that invited me on the team after I got off the ultimate fighter,
it was just a short while later that they were having to ask me to leave the
team. It was like a vote Elliot Marshall, uh, Trevor Whitman.
I think Justin Gates was just starting to come up.
I don't know if he was actually training full time then, uh,
but he was still at north, uh, Northern Colorado state or Northern Colorado, uh,
wrestling there. But they said, Justin, like, um,
you, we love you, but you gotta go. You gotta go get help.
And it should have went and got helped.
But that's when I found my purpose with the pigs. I,
I I've heard this quote that said no act kindness,
no matter how small ever goes wasted.
And so I started at the local children's hospital, became a local volunteer,
went through night school for it later. You remember HD net and, uh,
inside MMA with boss rutin. Yeah. Um,
those guys came out to the Denver children's hospital.
This was like nine months of me being sober.
All of a sudden now I have Rashad visiting. Um, the kids at the,
in Shane Carwin Dway Brendan Shaw,
visiting the kids that I would push around in the wheelchairs and stuff.
It gave me purpose. So, and that purpose helped me stay sober. Sorry. So.
2020, this was the first time you had had anything since 2000. And.
Like when 10, uh, it wasn't. I, I had, I'd had three pretty big relapses, so,
so.
10, whole years of.
Sobriety, but I had relapsed three times in that time. Oh, in the 10 years,
in the 10 years, I'd relapsed for 30 days.
I had relapse for nine days and I had a relapse for five days.
Oh, cuz these are different relapses. Yeah.
This is not the ones you're talking about. The recent ones with your shoulder.
Uh.
No that led in that five day then led into a big, a big one.
I'll go ahead and explain. I.
Was confused cause when you 30 days, no, I thought you meant this year.
No, no, not this year. Um,
basically March to May 15th
while I was out, I was out there using and um,
I felt so much shame and so much guilt. Um,
because man, I've, I've been on your show, I've been doing good things.
I've been, um, really trying to live the right life.
And uh, my marriage failed, which is okay. That happens.
And I just took on a lot of like shame. I couldn't, I couldn't, you know,
have that relationship be a success. Then whenever I went back to weed,
all of a out in that weed, I, I,
I just kept going more and more and more and more.
And then all of a sudden I found Oxy, then all of a sudden I found Coke. So you.
Started with weed.
Yeah. But then I went right to the Oxy and I would, I would,
what I would do as in my addict mind, I would think it would sound rational.
I'll just have weed. So I don't go back to Oxy and, and,
and that will help me with pain if I'm injured.
Cuz I I'd actually hurt my neck training with Rafael a little bit. And um,
he was sweeping me and I, I put my head out whenever I put my head out,
I crunched right on top of my, my neck or my head.
And it just sent this like crunch down into my cervical neck and it was hurting.
I was hurting. Um, more emotionally was stuffing it. I wasn't looking at it.
I was stuffing it, stuffing it, stuffing it.
And then what happened was I felt so ashamed. I told,
I told my board I needed rehab. And I said, I need, I need help.
Like I I've relapsed and I need help. And they've always supported me,
but I was scared that would, they support me in this. You know,
if I'm the leader of the organization or the founder and the spokesperson,
you know, we got an incredible internal team,
but like we've had donors from thousands, uh,
thousands of donors from all 50 states and 59 countries, you know,
did I just let everybody down? You know, and is this gonna be taken from me?
Is this life of purpose that I found, you know, am I gonna lose it all? Um,
and I felt so much shame. They, they were gonna send me to a place in Oklahoma,
not, not to knock it at all,
but I had known people from the recovery world cuz I had been going and sharing
my story of recovery, um, in rehabs, in, in, uh,
in uh,
different sober living homes and all of a sudden I'm back to where they are.
What.
Is this rehab place? You said this hardass rehab place that has a,
an amazing percentage of people get.
Successful. It's it's outta Dallas, Fort worth and it's called Stonegate.
And I don't think they advertise it as that hard, but it is that hard.
And I wanted a place once I talked to 'em I realize I like at you and.
They do. They absolutely. You, they did yell at me really.
I had a 21 year old kid yelling at me that was over what? Uh,
over a green towel. You wanna tackle him? Uh, I was just like, bro,
I kinda wanted to at first, uh,
what they think is they gotta humble you and I'm like, man, life has humbled me.
That's why I'm year. Right? And I've been humbled enough.
And now I came here to get help. And but their whole thing is if, if,
if there's no, if they get to you to actually look at your,
if they call you on your, your, then, then you can start working through it,
yelling at.
You over a green towel.
Because you, we were only allowed to have white towels that they gave you.
So when you get there, they give you Walmart shoes,
they give you paper aware and they give you this hideous. What, what.
Paper, paper, underwear, why do they have paper.
Underwear? Uh, cuz they,
they take your clothes and they put 'em in a hot box and then they try to kill
if there's any cuz there's guys coming from all over the place. Right. And um,
I mean we, we had people that were Ivy league professors,
professional athletes explain I'm not, not sure,
but we had people also from like homeless shelters and what you mean hot box?
We a hot box kills any of the, the like bed bugs. Oh.
So if someone were to bring bed bugs in, um,
and get in the mattresses and things like that,
like if someone came from a homeless shelter or from the streets,
how could they.
Afford it?
Uh, I don't know. Honestly,
I think there was like a scholarship program because some of the people were
paying $895 a day there, but that, I think that's what they charge insurance.
Um, it was expensive man. So I just went through the divorce and I,
I basically gave the finances we had so she could go back to school and I was
gonna restart. And then, um,
then all of a sudden I need rehab and that's expensive. Um, insurance helped,
but then I had to do you find.
Yourself? This is a weird question, but I think it's,
I think it's valid. Do you find yourself? Oh, always in like a new problem.
Do you, are you, do you create problems? Do you think?
I think I try to help find a solution to problems, but I think for me, um,
you asked me a question after we got the treatment and our shoulders, our knees,
and you asked, what are you manifesting? Have this like sickness, you know,
these, all these sicknesses inside of you. I think now.
I exactly how I said it. That's not exactly how I said it. I, I said,
do you wonder if you are doing that? You're right. Because sometimes people.
Do. Do you wonder if you're bringing this into your life? Yeah. Sometimes.
People do create pro it's like find they find themselves in this eternal
state of conflict. Like some people,
they figure their way through life with very little conflict.
They're magical people. Yeah. I know a few of them it's rare. Yeah.
Some people are constantly engaged in some insurmountable problem.
And then they also go,
and in your case you find insurmountable problems,
like what you're doing with the Congo and the pigmies and Uganda and the, and,
and helping these people,
like it gives you purpose and it helps define your life
in a positive way. Yeah. Then when you're not there problems come up again,
like all kinds of major problems. There's always something, right. Well.
I've had some health problems for sure.
And then these relapses that had happened were, were really tough. The,
the biggest one was this one, um, in March. And let me,
let me tell you what happened because, um,
I didn't wanna go to this rehab in Oklahoma, that,
that I had known people that were there that talk,
it had a reputation for people using while they're even there.
Cuz they could have their phones at 5:00 PM. They could have visitors.
They could go to Walmart two or three days a week. Mm.
And then you can call your,
your connection and they can leave it to you at Walmart.
They can throw it over the gate and it's on 110 acres and they can send you a
picture of where it's at. Right. And you can just go dig it up or find it and,
and use. And I wanted a place where there, I, I wasn't going there for that.
I knew I was going to get sober, but I didn't want to be around other people.
So they take your phone away doing that. Yeah. You don't have your phone,
get paper, underwear.
Paper underwear, you get how comfortable or paper underwear it's terrible.
But you get it back. Uh, the next day or that night, however side,
the hot box I have.
To gets hot box to get your.
So's one day of. So that's how I get my towels back.
I brought nice towels and I got, they gave me my towels back. Well,
this guy's doing room checks.
Room checks are every day mm-hmm <affirmative> at least once a day. Um,
and uh, anyways, they found my green towels.
It's my first like 24 hours being there at our usual.
You didn't know that you didn't know, you couldn't have green towels.
They giving them back to me.
So all of a sudden I was using that and he gave me an infraction for, uh,
and if you get three infractions, you lose your phone. Call that week.
You don't get,
you don't even get one phone call until you've been in there three full weeks.
Because normally when guys go to rehab and then they start calling their
families, they start feeling like I gotta get outta here. I gotta get home.
You start telling yourself this. Like I,
my family's more important to take care of than me right now.
Mm-hmm <affirmative> when,
in really you're in crisis mode and you gotta take care of yourself before you
can take care of anyone else. And so, um,
I gotten two infractions for the two green towels I had. And uh,
I was about to lose my phone call at the three week mark. And uh, if,
cuz you get three, if you get three infractions in those first three weeks,
you lose your phone call.
And I got two for things I didn't even know couldn't have.
What was the other one? Um, no that was the green towel. He,
he took one green towel. He started walking off with,
he looked back and he saw in my,
my like cubby that there was another green towel there. So you got two.
Infractions for the same.
Thing. Right? And so, um, what a Dick <laugh> so, but,
but I would say that the counselors that were there and the recovery ad
advocates,
they're really hard on you because some of the guys that have left there,
if they let them leave their overconfident,
that they've got their problem nicked, um,
then they can go right back out and relapse and that. So how do.
They keep you from doing it again.
For me? Well, they can't, you have to keep yourself from doing it.
No one can keep me sober. No, no, no therapist. Right? No sponsor.
It's gotta be me.
But what,
what do they do to give you the tools to let you do it yourself?
I think you really start to unwind the,
the tangled web of why, um, you use.
And for me it's always been like self worth. It's been, uh, like
that bullying moment when I was a kid,
my my record can go right back to the three things the kids told me.
So I dressed up for a costume party. I went, um,
to my middle school crushes birthday party.
I crushed there because I was dressed like a Dr. Pepper transformer,
24 pack of my head, 12 packs on my arms. I went all out.
Everyone was excited cuz she loved transformers, optimist prime. I went as Dr.
Optimist pepper. Anyways, I get there, go to the backyard.
And when the door opens,
I get hit with a couple flashes of light and it's them taking pictures.
I hear the sound of laughter. I see that no one else is dressed up.
And my middle school crush said,
I can't believe we thought you were good enough to come to my party right next
to her, a boy said you're worthless.
And then my notorious bully from my third, eighth grade said,
you should just kill yourself.
And so that leads to basically whenever I would relapse,
I would say to myself, you're not good enough. You're worthless.
Maybe you should just kill yourself. You know, I was suicidal at 13.
I didn't kill myself because my mom, I thought, what would this do to her?
Do you still go back to that one day?
Like that one day when you were a child hurt you so badly,
that's that's still in your mind almost as like a benchmark for who you are
it.
I did. And that, that's why I've, I think I've really come to a place of like,
self-love seeing myself that like I'm when I'm needed, uh,
well the last six months. But.
Did this is after your UFC career, after your Bellator career? Yeah.
All the amazing things you've done with fight for the forgotten all the time
would.
Been the Congo. I would know it, but when I would relapse,
I would feel like such a piece garbage.
I would feel like I was a disappointment to myself,
but also to everybody else.
Catch new episodes. The Joe Rogan experience for free only on Spotify.
Watch back catalog Jr E videos on Spotify,
including clips easily seamlessly switch between video,
an audio experience on Spotify.
You can listen to the JRE in the background while using other apps and can
download episodes to save on data cost. All for free.
Spotify is absolutely free.
You don't have to have a premium account to watch new JRE episodes.
You just need to search for the JRE on your Spotify app.
Go to Spotify now to get this full episode of the Joe Rogan experience.